Metrics RC announcement blog post (#1339)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/blog/2022/metrics-announcement.md

---
title: OpenTelemetry Metrics Release Candidates
date: 2022-05-18
author: Morgan McLean
draft: true # TODO: remove this line once your post is ready to be published
---

OpenTelemetry’s metrics capabilities are now available as release candidates! This means that the specification, APIs, SDKs, and other components that author, capture, process, and otherwise interact with metrics now have the full set of OpenTelemetry metrics functionality and are ready for use. These release candidates will be promoted to general availability throughout the next few weeks.

The 1.0 metrics release includes the following:

- Metrics functionality included in the OpenTelemetry language-specific APIs, which provide language-specific interfaces that can create and manipulate metrics, and associate metadata and attributes to each. These are useful for:
    - Developers of shared libraries that are distributed to end-users, so that these end users can natively use OpenTelemetry to capture metrics from these. For example, gRPC uses these APIs to produce latency, throughput, and error rate metrics for each RPC method on a given service.

>     - People who develop and maintain web services or client applications, so that they can produce custom metrics or interact with existing metrics. For example, an e-commerce company could use the API to track how many purchases are made over time.

Author: ```suggestion
    - People who develop and maintain web services or client applications, so that they can produce custom metrics or interact with existing metrics. For example, an e-commerce company could use the API to track how many purchases are made over time.
    
```

>     - People who develop and maintain web services or client applications, so that they can produce custom metrics or interact with existing metrics. For example, an e-commerce company could use the API to track how many purchases are made over time.

Author: ```suggestion
    - People who develop and maintain web services or client applications, so that they can produce custom metrics or interact with existing metrics. For example, an e-commerce company could use the API to track how many purchases are made over time.
    
```

- Metrics functionality included in the OpenTelemetry SDKs for Java, JS, .Net, and Python (all other languages are still working towards metrics release candidates), which capture metrics from the APIs and perform some amount of processing. These are useful for:
    - Developers of applications that are used by other organizations, like databases, message queues, etc., who will expose metrics over OTLP (or Prometheus) so that their own end users are able to monitor the performance of these apps. These applications could be open or closed source.

>     - Developers of applications within a technology organization, who want to capture metrics generated by OpenTelemetry APIs within their applications, either by their own developers or from shared libraries that their applications depend on. These metrics can be exported through OTLP or exported through any other OpenTelemetry exporter.

Author: ```suggestion
    - Developers of applications within a technology organization, who want to capture metrics generated by OpenTelemetry APIs within their applications, either by their own developers or from shared libraries that their applications depend on. These metrics can be exported through OTLP or exported through any other OpenTelemetry exporter.
    
```

- Collector support for metrics, which includes the Collector’s ability to capture metrics from receivers for sources like host metrics or pre-packaged applications (these were already present in the Collector), the ability to receive metrics from protocols like OTLP and Prometheus, configuration-driven metric processing, and export these metrics to any supported destination. This is useful for:
    - Anyone who wants to capture metrics from their hosts (Linux VMs, Windows, VMs, Kubernetes, etc.) or pre-packaged applications (databases, message queues, etc.).
    - Anyone who wants to capture metrics from existing sources like OTLP (from OpenTelemetry SDKs, pre-packaged applications, etc.), Prometheus, or others.
    - Anyone who wants to process / modify metrics and metric metadata captured from these sources.

>     - Anyone who wants to convert metrics from one format to another. For example, the Collector can capture metrics from a mix of OTLP and Prometheus sources, and then send all of these to a single destination using OTLP (with the standard OpenTelemetry semantic conventions), Prometheus, or any other exporter.

Author: ```suggestion
    - Anyone who wants to convert metrics from one format to another. For example, the Collector can capture metrics from a mix of OTLP and Prometheus sources, and then send all of these to a single destination using OTLP (with the standard OpenTelemetry semantic conventions), Prometheus, or any other exporter.
    
```

- Full OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP) support for efficiently serializing and transmitting metrics between systems.
- A metrics section of the specification, which defines different types of metrics, their shapes, how to process them, and semantic conventions. This is primarily used by OpenTelemetry contributors but also provides guidance to OpenTelemetry users who are authoring metrics or metadata.

All of this functionality is additive to OpenTelemetry’s existing tracing support, and both signal types share the same metadata and semantic conventions. As of this announcement, the Java, JS, .Net, and Python SDKs have issued release candidates for OpenTelemetry’s metric capabilities, and more languages will be issuing metrics release candidates soon. Each of these releases will be followed by general availability after we receive feedback from users.

## Getting Started

> If you’re already using a mix of the OpenTelemetry APIs, SDKs, language agents, or Collector, then you can access GA metrics functionality by updating your OpenTelemetry artifacts to their latest versions. You can find documentation and getting started guides for each artifact’s metrics capabilities within [the official OpenTelemetry documentation](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/) and examples and supplementary documentation is often available within each artifact’s corresponding GitHub repository.

Author: ```suggestion
If you’re already using a mix of the OpenTelemetry APIs, SDKs, language agents, or Collector, then you can access GA metrics functionality by updating your OpenTelemetry artifacts to their latest versions. You can find documentation and getting started guides for each artifact’s metrics capabilities within [the official OpenTelemetry documentation](../../../docs) and examples and supplementary documentation is often available within each artifact’s corresponding GitHub repository.
```

## What’s Next for OpenTelemetry

> WDistributed traces and logs were the two halves of OpenTelemetry’s core promise when we announced it at Kubecon EU in 2019. With the general availability of metrics, we have produced the capabilities that we originally set out to create, meaning that we can shift our focus to further investing into the robustness and ease of use of each component, the number of data sources that OpenTelemetry can capture telemetry from (either through the OpenTelemetry APIs, OTLP, or otherwise), and new capabilities and signal types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Distributed traces and logs were the two halves of OpenTelemetry’s core promise when we announced it at Kubecon EU in 2019. With the general availability of metrics, we have produced the capabilities that we originally set out to create, meaning that we can shift our focus to further investing into the robustness and ease of use of each component, the number of data sources that OpenTelemetry can capture telemetry from (either through the OpenTelemetry APIs, OTLP, or otherwise), and new capabilities and signal types.
```

---
title: OpenTelemetry Metrics Release Candidates
date: 2022-05-18
author: Morgan McLean
draft: true # TODO: remove this line once your post is ready to be published
---

OpenTelemetry’s metrics capabilities are now available as release candidates! This means that the specification, APIs, SDKs, and other components that author, capture, process, and otherwise interact with metrics now have the full set of OpenTelemetry metrics functionality and are ready for use. These release candidates will be promoted to general availability throughout the next few weeks.

The 1.0 metrics release includes the following:

> - Metrics functionality included in the OpenTelemetry APIs for every GA-declared language, which provide language-specific interfaces that can create and manipulate metrics, and associate metadata and attributes to each. These are useful for:

Reviewer 2: This is a little confusing coming before the next major point, which indicates that there are no GA-declared languages. The examples given still ultimately end up depending on a given language's support, I think?

Author: Good point. The APIs are mostly GA while the SDKs are not (even for a given language), but I don't think that I got this across very clearly. Fixing.

Author: ```suggestion
- Metrics functionality included in the OpenTelemetry language-specific APIs, which provide language-specific interfaces that can create and manipulate metrics, and associate metadata and attributes to each. These are useful for:
```

    - Developers of shared libraries that are distributed to end-users, so that these end users can natively use OpenTelemetry to capture metrics from these. For example, gRPC uses these APIs to produce latency, throughput, and error rate metrics for each RPC method on a given service.
    - People who develop and maintain web services or client applications, so that they can produce custom metrics or interact with existing metrics. For example, an e-commerce company could use the API to track how many purchases are made over time.

>     

Author: ```suggestion
```

    - Anyone who wants to convert metrics from one format to another. For example, the Collector can capture metrics from a mix of OTLP and Prometheus sources, and then send all of these to a single destination using OTLP (with the standard OpenTelemetry semantic conventions), Prometheus, or any other exporter.
- Full OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP) support for efficiently serializing and transmitting metrics between systems.
- A metrics section of the specification, which defines different types of metrics, their shapes, how to process them, and semantic conventions. This is primarily used by OpenTelemetry contributors but also provides guidance to OpenTelemetry users who are authoring metrics or metadata.

All of this functionality is additive to OpenTelemetry’s existing tracing support, and both signal types share the same metadata and semantic conventions. As of this announcement, the Java, JS, .Net, and Python SDKs have issued release candidates for OpenTelemetry’s metric capabilities, and more languages will be issuing metrics release candidates soon. Each of these releases will be followed by general availability after we receive feedback from users.

## Getting Started

> If you’re already using a mix of the OpenTelemetry APIs, SDKs, language agents, or Collector, then you can access GA metrics functionality by updating your OpenTelemetry artifacts to their latest versions. You can find documentation and getting started guides for each artifact’s metrics capabilities within [the official OpenTelemetry documentation](../../../docs) and examples and supplementary documentation is often available within each artifact’s corresponding GitHub repository.

Reviewer 2: "You can find documentation [...]"

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6309070/167964957-bfdff251-77fe-4131-a31e-a4bdbb112a8d.png)

Would it be helpful to say that documentation is in-progress? Because, uhh, we're still working through pretty major tracing docs, let alone metrics 😬

Author: :)

```suggestion
If you’re already using a mix of the OpenTelemetry APIs, SDKs, language agents, or Collector, then you can access GA metrics functionality by updating your OpenTelemetry artifacts to their latest versions. We're currently producing documentation and getting started guides for each artifact’s metrics capabilities within [the official OpenTelemetry documentation](../../../docs). Examples and supplementary documentation are also being added to each artifact’s corresponding GitHub repository.
```

> ---

Author: I agree, but unfortunately this will impact the URL for the post on opentelemetry.io, which has already been direct linked by many of the vendors that are cross-posting this

title: OpenTelemetry Metrics Release Candidates
date: 2022-05-18
author: Morgan McLean
draft: true # TODO: remove this line once your post is ready to be published
---

> 

Reviewer 3: Editorial: As a general comment, please consider line-wrapping at 80 chars.

Author: Will do on the next one. This one was imported from Google docs and is going live tomorrow, so I'd prefer not to mess with it :)

> OpenTelemetry’s metrics capabilities are now available as release candidates! This means that the specification, APIs, SDKs, and other components that author, capture, process, and otherwise interact with metrics now have the full set of OpenTelemetry metrics functionality and are ready for use. These release candidates will be promoted to general availability throughout the next few weeks.

Reviewer 3: > OpenTelemetry’s metrics capabilities are now available as release candidates!

It isn't for all languages, so it might be better to be clear about this from the start. WDYT @mtwo?

At a minimum, consider something like this:

> OpenTelemetry’s ... as release candidates (RCs) -- for most languages, for details, read on.

Or list the languages that are in RC.

Author: ```suggestion
OpenTelemetry’s metrics capabilities are now available as release candidates, starting with Java, .Net, and Python! This means that the specification, APIs, SDKs, and other components that author, capture, process, and otherwise interact with metrics now have the full set of OpenTelemetry metrics functionality and are ready for use. These release candidates will be promoted to general availability throughout the next few weeks.
```

The 1.0 metrics release includes the following:

- Metrics functionality included in the OpenTelemetry language-specific APIs, which provide language-specific interfaces that can create and manipulate metrics, and associate metadata and attributes to each. These are useful for:
    - Developers of shared libraries that are distributed to end-users, so that these end users can natively use OpenTelemetry to capture metrics from these. For example, gRPC uses these APIs to produce latency, throughput, and error rate metrics for each RPC method on a given service.

>     - People who develop and maintain web services or client applications, so that they can produce custom metrics or interact with existing metrics. For example, an e-commerce company could use the API to track how many purchases are made over time.

Author: ```suggestion
    - Developers who create and maintain web services or client applications, so that they can produce custom metrics or interact with existing metrics. For example, an e-commerce company could use the API to track how many purchases are made over time.
```

> - Metrics functionality included in the OpenTelemetry SDKs for Java, JS, .Net, and Python (all other languages are still working towards metrics release candidates), which capture metrics from the APIs and perform some amount of processing. These are useful for:

Author: ```suggestion
- Metrics functionality included in the OpenTelemetry SDKs for Java, .Net, Python, and JS (coming next week) SDKs, which capture metrics from the APIs and perform some amount of processing. Metrics support for other languages is still in development. These are useful for:
```

    - Anyone who wants to capture metrics from their hosts (Linux VMs, Windows, VMs, Kubernetes, etc.) or pre-packaged applications (databases, message queues, etc.).
    - Anyone who wants to capture metrics from existing sources like OTLP (from OpenTelemetry SDKs, pre-packaged applications, etc.), Prometheus, or others.
    - Anyone who wants to process / modify metrics and metric metadata captured from these sources.
    - Anyone who wants to convert metrics from one format to another. For example, the Collector can capture metrics from a mix of OTLP and Prometheus sources, and then send all of these to a single destination using OTLP (with the standard OpenTelemetry semantic conventions), Prometheus, or any other exporter.
    
- Full OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP) support for efficiently serializing and transmitting metrics between systems.
- A metrics section of the specification, which defines different types of metrics, their shapes, how to process them, and semantic conventions. This is primarily used by OpenTelemetry contributors but also provides guidance to OpenTelemetry users who are authoring metrics or metadata.

> All of this functionality is additive to OpenTelemetry’s existing tracing support, and both signal types share the same metadata and semantic conventions. As of this announcement, the Java, JS, .Net, and Python SDKs have issued release candidates for OpenTelemetry’s metric capabilities, and more languages will be issuing metrics release candidates soon. Each of these releases will be followed by general availability after we receive feedback from users.

Author: ```suggestion
All of this functionality is additive to OpenTelemetry’s existing tracing support, and both signal types share the same metadata and semantic conventions. As of this announcement, the Java, .Net, and Python SDKs have issued release candidates for OpenTelemetry’s metric capabilities, JS is coming next week, and more languages will be issuing metrics release candidates throughout the coming months. Each of these releases will be followed by general availability after we receive feedback from users.
```

> All of this functionality is additive to OpenTelemetry’s existing tracing support, and both signal types share the same metadata and semantic conventions. As of this announcement, the Java, .Net, and Python SDKs have issued release candidates for OpenTelemetry’s metric capabilities, JS is coming next week, and more languages will be issuing metrics release candidates throughout the coming months. Each of these releases will be followed by general availability after we receive feedback from users.

Reviewer 3: > As of this announcement, the Java, .Net, and Python SDKs have issued release candidates for OpenTelemetry’s metric capabilities, JS is coming next week, and more languages will be issuing metrics release candidates throughout the coming months.

Consider making this more visually distinctive. E.g.:

> As of this announcement, the following languages have issued release candidates:
>
> - [Java](...)
> - [.Net](...)
> - [Python](...)
>
> [JavaScript](...) release is planned for next week, and more ... months.

Author: ```suggestion
All of this functionality is additive to OpenTelemetry’s existing tracing support, and both signal types share the same metadata and semantic conventions. As of this announcement, the following languages have issued metrics release candidates:

- Java
- .Net
- Python

The RC release for JS is planned for next week, and more languages will be issuing metrics release candidates throughout the coming months. Each of these releases will be followed by general availability after we receive feedback from users.
```

> ## Getting Started

Reviewer 3: Nite: add a space between the heading and the text that follows (here and below).

Author: ```suggestion
## Getting Started

```

> If you’re already using a mix of the OpenTelemetry APIs, SDKs, language agents, or Collector, then you can access GA metrics functionality by updating your OpenTelemetry artifacts to their latest versions. We're currently producing documentation and getting started guides for each artifact’s metrics capabilities within [the official OpenTelemetry documentation](../../../docs). Examples and supplementary documentation are also being added to each artifact’s corresponding GitHub repository.

Reviewer 3: (Another reason why line-wrapping is good: it then becomes easier to pin specific review comments. In the meantime, I'll quote the text in the following series of comments on this paragraph.)

> or Collector

-->

> and Collector

Reviewer 3: > you can access GA metrics

GA or RC?

Reviewer 3: Replace `../../../docs` with just `/docs/`

Reviewer 3: Consider changing:

> We're currently producing documentation ...

to

> We're currently updating [the official OpenTelemetry documentation](/docs/) for each artifact’s metrics capabilities.

Author: ```suggestion
If you’re already using a mix of the OpenTelemetry APIs, SDKs, language agents, and Collector, then you can access the release candidate metrics functionality by updating your OpenTelemetry artifacts to their latest versions. We're currently updating [the official OpenTelemetry documentation](/docs) for each artifact's metrics capabilities. Examples and supplementary documentation are also being added to each artifact’s corresponding GitHub repository.
```

> ## What’s Next for OpenTelemetry

Author: ```suggestion
## What’s Next for OpenTelemetry

```
